---
layout: post
title: Building a Blog with Reptar and Bulma
date: 2017-09-04
excerpt: How and Why I Migrated my Jekyll Blog to Reptar.
draft: true
---

A while ago, I decided to migrate my webserver from the VPS provider DigitalOcean to Vultr. While DigitalOcean provides a great service (and I still use their help pages), Vultr had just launched a 2.50 USD/mo tier which sounded attractive to me for two reasons. One, I'm a graduate student and saving $30/yr sounded good to me, and two, I'm only serving a static site from this VPS, and don't need much server power to keep it up and running!

Around the same time, I heard the Front End Happy Hour podcast [episode about static site generators](http://frontendhappyhour.com/episodes/static-site-generators-and-dynamic-drink-drinkers/) featuring Harry Wolff. Harry created Reptar, a static site generator built in JavaScript, a much more performant alternative to the widely-used Jekyll, built in Ruby. The idea of switching to a static site generator that I could install via npm was very attractive. If I could ditch Jekyll, then I could build my site on this slimmed down VPS offering and build my sites remotely without managing a ruby installation on my VPS. And as if I needed any other reason, it was called <span class="hover-text" title="The static site generator formerly known as yarn.">Reptar</span>!!

Initially, I thought about porting my Jekyll theme over to Reptar. However, I quickly realized this might be more complicated than I initially anticipated. Besides, I had been wanting to redesign the site anyways, as I was hoping to find a way to showcase some of my photography on the site.  However, if I was going to attempt a redesign, I knew I would need to find a CSS framework to help me out. I explored the post-bootstrap era of CSS frameworks and eventually settled on [Bulma](http://bulma.io). Bulma is a fantastic framework for a couple of reasons. First, it is build on flexbox, a <span class="hover-text" title="Keep those pesky footers stuck to the bottom of the screen with just a few lines of CSS.">modern</span> web layout solution. Second, it is fully-featured and widely-used, meaning support would be simple, and I could dig into the GitHub issues for the framework if I ran into any problems.
